[docs] Rewrite Using Clerk guide for @clerk/expo Core 3 (#45225)
expo/expo: docs/pages/guides/using-clerk.mdx

---
title: Using Clerk

> description: A guide on adding Clerk authentication and user management to your Expo project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description:  Learn how to add Clerk authentication and user management in your Expo and React Native projects.
```

I'd suggest improving the previous version here.

> sidebar_title: Clerk

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this is a neat idea but we'll have to keep the previous one for consistency with other guides in this subsection and other subsections around it.

<img width="676" height="1372" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/42fecac4-5a3e-430b-863a-62a9b7c71eed" />

I'll discuss this later with our team and pick it up.

platforms: ['android', 'ios', 'web']
---

import { BoxLink } from '~/ui/components/BoxLink';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '~/ui/components/Tabs';
import { BookOpen02Icon } from '@expo/styleguide-icons/outline/BookOpen02Icon';

> [Clerk](https://clerk.com/expo-authentication) is an authentication and user management platform that provides sign-up, sign-in, multi-factor authentication, social sign-in, organizations, and a hosted user database. The [`@clerk/expo`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@clerk/expo) SDK gives you React hooks, control components, and prebuilt native UI components that render with SwiftUI on iOS and Jetpack Compose on Android.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Clerk](https://clerk.com/expo-authentication) is an authentication and user management platform that provides sign-up, sign-in, multi-factor authentication, social sign-in, organizations, and a hosted user database. The [`@clerk/expo`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@clerk/expo) SDK gives you React hooks, control components, and prebuilt native UI components that render with Jetpack Compose on Android and    SwiftUI on iOS.
```

See: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#platform-order-when-referencing-android-ios-and-web-or-multiple-platforms

This guide shows you how to install `@clerk/expo`, wrap your app in `<ClerkProvider>`, and choose the integration approach that fits your project. It targets `@clerk/expo` Core 3 (the 3.x release line), which supports Expo SDK 53, 54, and 55.

## Choose your integration approach

`@clerk/expo` supports three approaches. Pick the one that matches your needs — you can change later without rewriting your app.

| Approach | What you build | Runs in Expo Go | Best for |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | JavaScript only | Your own React Native screens that call `useSignIn()` and `useSignUp()` | Yes | Maximum UI control, prototyping in Expo Go |

Reviewer: I'd suggest using `YesIcon` and `NoIcon` here instead of plain text (Yes/No). Please import them from here: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/docs/ui/components/DocIcons/index.ts

| JavaScript with native sign-in | Your own screens plus native Sign in with Google and Sign in with Apple buttons | No | Apps that want a custom look but native social sign-in |
| Native UI components | Drop in `<AuthView />`, `<UserButton />`, and `<UserProfileView />` from `@clerk/expo/native` | No | The fastest path to a complete sign-in and account management UI |

> > **info** The native UI components in `@clerk/expo/native` are currently in beta. They render with SwiftUI on iOS and Jetpack Compose on Android, and they synchronize the signed-in session back to the JavaScript SDK so all `@clerk/expo` hooks (such as `useAuth()` and `useUser()`) stay in sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **info** The native UI components in `@clerk/expo/native` are currently in beta. They render with Jetpack Compose on Android and SwiftUI on iOS and they synchronize the signed-in session back to the JavaScript SDK so all `@clerk/expo` hooks (such as `useAuth()` and `useUser()`) stay in sync.
```

## Prerequisites

Before you start, you need:

- A Clerk account and a Clerk application. Sign up at the [Clerk Dashboard](https://dashboard.clerk.com/).
- The **Native API** enabled in the Clerk Dashboard for your application. Open the [Native applications](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=native-applications) page and ensure **Native API** is on. This is required for any Expo integration that uses `@clerk/expo`.
- An Expo project running SDK 53 or later. `@clerk/expo` Core 3 has a peer dependency of `expo: >=53 <56`.

> - A development build for the native sign-in and native UI component approaches. The JavaScript-only approach also works in Expo Go.

Reviewer: Please use https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/docs/README.md#use-prerequisites-for-setup-checklists.

## Install and configure Clerk

<Step label="1">

### Install `@clerk/expo` and `expo-secure-store`

Use `npx expo install` so versions match your Expo SDK:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install @clerk/expo expo-secure-store']} />

`expo-secure-store` is a peer dependency. Clerk uses it through `@clerk/expo/token-cache` to encrypt session tokens with the iOS Keychain and the Android Keystore.

If you plan to use native Sign in with Google, also install `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-crypto']} />

For native Sign in with Apple, install both `expo-apple-authentication` and `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-apple-authentication expo-crypto']} />

You do not need any of these extra packages if you only use `<AuthView />` from `@clerk/expo/native`, since the component handles social sign-in flows internally.

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Add the Clerk config plugin

> Add `@clerk/expo` to the `plugins` array in your **app.json**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add `@clerk/expo` to the `plugins` array in your [app config](/workflow/configuration/):
```

See: https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#referencing-appjsonappconfigjsonappconfigjsappconfigts

> ```json

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json app.json
````

{
  "expo": {
    "plugins": ["@clerk/expo"]
  }
}
```

> The plugin configures the iOS URL scheme for native Sign in with Google (when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is set) and applies the Android packaging fixes required by the underlying `clerk-android` SDK. The Apple Sign In entitlement is added by the `expo-apple-authentication` plugin if you install that package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin configures the iOS URL scheme for native Sign in with Google (when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is set) and applies the Android packaging fixes required by the underlying `clerk-android` SDK. The Apple Sign In entitlement is added by the plugin from `expo-apple-authentication` library, if you install it.
```

</Step>

<Step label="3">

### Add your Clerk Publishable Key

Copy your Publishable Key from the [API keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page in the Clerk Dashboard, then add it to a **.env** file in the root of your project:

> ```bash

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text .env
````

EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_your-key-here
```

> The `EXPO_PUBLIC_` prefix is required because Expo inlines these values at build time so they are available in your JavaScript bundle. Clerk's Publishable Key is safe to expose. **Do not** put Secret Keys behind the `EXPO_PUBLIC_` prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `EXPO_PUBLIC_` prefix is required because [Expo inlines these values at build time](/guides/environment-variables/#reading-environment-variables-from-env-files) so they are available in your JavaScript bundle. Clerk's Publishable Key is safe to expose. **Do not** put Secret Keys behind the `EXPO_PUBLIC_` prefix.
```

A link to environment variable guide would be nice to support and further clarify that statement.

</Step>

<Step label="4">

### Wrap your app in `<ClerkProvider>`

> In your root layout file (**app/_layout.tsx** with Expo Router, or **App.tsx** otherwise), wrap your app in `<ClerkProvider>` and pass the Publishable Key. Passing `tokenCache` explicitly is recommended:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your root layout file (**src/app/_layout.tsx** with Expo Router), wrap your app in `<ClerkProvider>` and pass the Publishable Key. Passing `tokenCache` explicitly is recommended:
```

All of our guides follow only the default template's layout so i think we can improve and omit the App.tsx.

> ```tsx

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```tsx src/app/_layout.tsx
````

import { ClerkProvider } from '@clerk/expo';
import { tokenCache } from '@clerk/expo/token-cache';
import { Slot } from 'expo-router';

const publishableKey = process.env.EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY!;

if (!publishableKey) {
  throw new Error('Add your Clerk Publishable Key to the .env file');
}

export default function RootLayout() {
  return (
    <ClerkProvider publishableKey={publishableKey} tokenCache={tokenCache}>
      <Slot />
    </ClerkProvider>
  );
}
```

> In Core 3, `publishableKey` is required on `<ClerkProvider>` for Expo apps — environment variables inside `node_modules` are not inlined during production React Native builds, so the prop must be passed explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Core 3, `publishableKey` is required on `<ClerkProvider>` for Expo apps. Environment variables inside **node_modules** are not inlined during production React Native builds, so the prop must be passed explicitly.
```

`tokenCache` from `@clerk/expo/token-cache` persists the user's session across app restarts using `expo-secure-store`. Passing it explicitly makes the dependency clear and lets you swap in a custom cache implementation later.

</Step>

## Build your sign-in screen

The next step depends on which approach you chose. The tabs below show the minimum code for each.

> <Tabs tabs={['Native UI components', 'JavaScript with native sign-in', 'JavaScript only']}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tabs tabs={['Native UI components', 'JavaScript with native sign-in', 'JavaScript only (Expo Go)']}>
```

Highlighting here would be great way without opening the tab itself if someone is quickly scanning the doc.

`<AuthView />` accepts `mode="signIn" | "signUp" | "signInOrUp"` and an optional `isDismissable` boolean.

To show the user's avatar and a profile modal elsewhere in your app, use `<UserButton />`:

```tsx
import { UserButton } from '@clerk/expo/native';
import { Show } from '@clerk/expo';
import { View } from 'react-native';

export function Header() {
  return (
    <Show when="signed-in">
      <View style={{ width: 36, height: 36, borderRadius: 18, overflow: 'hidden' }}>
        <UserButton />
      </View>
    </Show>
  );
}
```

`<UserButton />` fills its parent, so the parent controls size and shape. To open the native profile modal from any other UI, use the `useUserProfileModal()` hook:

```tsx
import { useUserProfileModal } from '@clerk/expo';
import { Pressable, Text } from 'react-native';

export function ProfileLink() {
  const { presentUserProfile, isAvailable } = useUserProfileModal();
  return (
    <Pressable onPress={presentUserProfile} disabled={!isAvailable}>
      <Text>Manage profile</Text>
    </Pressable>
  );
}
```

This approach requires a development build because the components are backed by native modules:

> <Terminal
>   cmd={[
>     '# Run a development build locally',
>     '$ npx expo run:ios',
>     '$ npx expo run:android',
>     '# Or build with EAS',
>     '$ eas build --platform ios --profile development',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    '# Run a development build locally',
    '$ npx expo run:android'
    '',
    '$ npx expo run:ios',    ,
    '',
    '# Or build with EAS',
    '$ eas build --platform ios --profile development',
```

  ]}
/>

</Tab>

<Tab>

Use the `useSignInWithGoogle()` and `useSignInWithApple()` hooks alongside your own React Native UI:

```tsx
import { useSignInWithGoogle } from '@clerk/expo/google';
import { useRouter } from 'expo-router';
import { Platform, Text, TouchableOpacity } from 'react-native';

export function GoogleSignInButton() {
  const { startGoogleAuthenticationFlow } = useSignInWithGoogle();
  const router = useRouter();

  if (Platform.OS !== 'ios' && Platform.OS !== 'android') return null;

  const onPress = async () => {
    try {
      const { createdSessionId, setActive } = await startGoogleAuthenticationFlow();
      if (createdSessionId && setActive) {
        await setActive({ session: createdSessionId });
        router.replace('/');
      }
    } catch (err) {
      console.error('Google sign-in error', err);
    }
  };

  return (
    <TouchableOpacity onPress={onPress}>
      <Text>Continue with Google</Text>
    </TouchableOpacity>
  );
}
```

> On Android, this uses Credential Manager and never opens a browser. On iOS, the flow uses ASAuthorization (the system credential picker) when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is configured; without it, iOS falls back to a system browser sheet. Follow the Clerk guides linked at the bottom of this page to register your iOS bundle ID, Android package name, and SHA-256 fingerprints in the Clerk Dashboard and the Google Cloud Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Android, this uses Credential Manager and never opens a browser. On iOS, the flow uses `ASAuthorization` (the system credential picker) when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is configured &mdash; without it, iOS falls back to a system browser sheet. Follow the Clerk guides linked at the bottom of this page to register your Android package name, iOS bundle ID, and SHA-256 fingerprints in the Clerk Dashboard and the Google Cloud Console.
```

`useSignInWithApple()` from `@clerk/expo/apple` follows the same pattern (`startAppleAuthenticationFlow()` returning `{ createdSessionId, setActive }`) and is iOS only. App Store Guideline 4.8 requires that any app offering third-party social sign-in must also offer Sign in with Apple on iOS.

> This approach requires a development build because it uses native modules. `useSignInWithGoogle()` requires `expo-crypto`; `useSignInWithApple()` requires both `expo-apple-authentication` and `expo-crypto`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach requires a development build because it uses native modules. `useSignInWithGoogle()` requires `expo-crypto`. The `useSignInWithApple()` requires both `expo-apple-authentication` and `expo-crypto`.
```

</Tab>

</Tabs>

## Read the signed-in user

Anywhere in your app, use `useUser()` and `useAuth()` to read user data, plus `<Show>` and `useClerk()` to protect content and sign out:

```tsx
import { Show, useClerk, useUser } from '@clerk/expo';
import { Link } from 'expo-router';
import { Pressable, Text, View } from 'react-native';

export default function HomeScreen() {
  const { user } = useUser();
  const { signOut } = useClerk();

  return (
    <View>
      <Show when="signed-in">
        <Text>Hello, {user?.firstName ?? 'friend'}</Text>
        <Pressable onPress={() => signOut()}>
          <Text>Sign out</Text>
        </Pressable>
      </Show>
      <Show when="signed-out">
        <Link href="/(auth)/sign-in">
          <Text>Sign in</Text>
        </Link>
      </Show>
    </View>
  );
}
```

`<Show>` replaces the legacy `<SignedIn>`, `<SignedOut>`, and `<Protect>` components from earlier versions of the SDK. It also accepts `when={{ role: '...' }}`, `when={{ permission: '...' }}`, and other authorization predicates.

## Run the app

> <Tabs tabs={['Android', 'iOS']}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tabs tabs={['Android', 'iOS', 'JavaScript-only (Expo Go)']}>
```

Please add a third tab here.

<Tab>

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:android']} />

</Tab>

<Tab>

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:ios']} />

</Tab>

</Tabs>

> For the JavaScript-only approach, `npx expo start` and Expo Go also work.

Reviewer: Let's use the Terminal component here for `npx expo start`.

If you plan to use native Sign in with Google, also install `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-crypto']} />

For native Sign in with Apple, install both `expo-apple-authentication` and `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-apple-authentication expo-crypto']} />

You do not need any of these extra packages if you only use `<AuthView />` from `@clerk/expo/native`, since the component handles social sign-in flows internally.

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Add the Clerk config plugin

Add `@clerk/expo` to the `plugins` array in your [app config](/workflow/configuration/):

```json app.json
{
  "expo": {
    "plugins": ["@clerk/expo"]
  }
}
```

The plugin configures the iOS URL scheme for native Sign in with Google (when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is set) and applies the Android packaging fixes required by the underlying `clerk-android` SDK. The Apple Sign In entitlement is added by the plugin from `expo-apple-authentication` library, if you install it.

</Step>

<Step label="3">

> ### Add your Clerk Publishable Key

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{/* vale off */}
### Add your Clerk Publishable Key
{/* vale on */}
```

`<Show>` replaces the legacy `<SignedIn>`, `<SignedOut>`, and `<Protect>` components from earlier versions of the SDK. It also accepts `when={{ role: '...' }}`, `when={{ permission: '...' }}`, and other authorization predicates.

## Run the app

<Tabs tabs={['Android', 'iOS', 'JavaScript-only (Expo Go)']}>

<Tab>

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:android']} />

</Tab>

<Tab>

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo run:ios']} />

</Tab>

<Tab>

For the JavaScript-only approach, run the following command and open the project in Expo Go:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo start']} />

</Tab>

</Tabs>

## Next steps

<BoxLink
  title="Clerk Expo quickstart"
  description="Step-by-step instructions for setting up each of the three integration approaches, with companion repositories on GitHub."
  href="https://clerk.com/docs/expo/getting-started/quickstart"
  Icon={BookOpen02Icon}
/>

<BoxLink
  title="Native components reference"
  description="API reference for AuthView, UserButton, and UserProfileView, including configuration, theming, and platform requirements."
  href="https://clerk.com/docs/reference/expo/native-components/overview"
  Icon={BookOpen02Icon}
/>

<BoxLink
  title="Sign in with Google"

>   description="Set up native Sign in with Google for iOS and Android using ASAuthorization and Credential Manager."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description="Set up native Sign in with Google for Android and iOS using ASAuthorization and Credential Manager."
```

If you plan to use native Sign in with Google, also install `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-crypto']} />

For native Sign in with Apple, install both `expo-apple-authentication` and `expo-crypto`:

<Terminal cmd={['$ npx expo install expo-apple-authentication expo-crypto']} />

You do not need any of these extra packages if you only use `<AuthView />` from `@clerk/expo/native`, since the component handles social sign-in flows internally.

</Step>

<Step label="2">

### Add the Clerk config plugin

Add `@clerk/expo` to the `plugins` array in your [app config](/workflow/configuration/):

```json app.json
{
  "expo": {
    "plugins": ["@clerk/expo"]
  }
}
```

The plugin configures the iOS URL scheme for native Sign in with Google (when `EXPO_PUBLIC_CLERK_GOOGLE_IOS_URL_SCHEME` is set) and applies the Android packaging fixes required by the underlying `clerk-android` SDK. The Apple Sign In entitlement is added by the plugin from `expo-apple-authentication` library, if you install it.

</Step>

<Step label="3">

{/* vale off */}
### Add your Clerk Publishable Key

> {/* vale on */}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{/* vale off */}

### Add your Clerk Publishable Key

{/* vale on */}
```
